THERE ARE SOME
GREAT QUESTIONS
THAT HAVE INTRIGUED
AND HAUNTED US
SINCE THE DAWN
OF HUMANITY.
WHAT IS
OUT THERE?
HOW DID
WE GET HERE?
WHAT IS THE
WORLD MADE OF?
THE STORY OF OUR SEARCH
TO ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
IS THE STORY
OF SCIENCE.
OF ALL HUMAN ENDEAVORS,
SCIENCE HAS HAD
THE GREATEST IMPACT
ON OUR LIVES -
ON HOW WE SEE THE WORLD,
ON HOW WE SEE OURSELVES.
ITS IDEAS...
ITS ACHIEVEMENTS...
ITS RESULTS ARE
ALL AROUND US.
BUT THE STORY OF SCIENCE
HAS BEEN SHAPED AS MUCH BY
WHAT'S OUTSIDE THE
LABORATORY AS INSIDE.
POWER AND PASSION,
RIVALRY AND SHEER CHANCE
HAVE ALL PLAYED
SIGNIFICANT ROLES.
THIS IS THE STORY OF HOW
HISTORY MADE SCIENCE
AND HOW SCIENCE
MADE HISTORY.
THIS WEEK, DELVING DEEP
TO FIND ORDER AND BEAUTY.
THE SEARCH TO UNDERSTAND
THE NATURE OF MATTER,
WHAT IT IS THAT MAKES
UP THE WORLD AROUND US
MAY SEEM LIKE AN ACADEMIC
AND ESOTERIC QUEST.
BUT OVER THE MILLENNIA IT
HAS UNLOCKED ENORMOUS POWER
AND HAS RADICALLY
TRANSFORMED OUR WORLD.
THE FIRST PEOPLE WHO SET ABOUT
TO SYSTEMATICALLY INVESTIGATE
WHAT THE WORLD IS MADE
OF WERE THE ALCHEMISTS.
THEY FLOURISHED IN THE LATE
MIDDLE AGES, WORKING IN SECRET,
PROTECTING THEIR KNOWLEDGE
WITH CODES AND CIPHERS.
AN ALCHEMIST WAS
REALLY A PERSON WHO
I THINK WAS STRIVING TO
TRANSFORM THE WORLD,
TRANSFORM NATURE.
THE THEORIES THEY
HAD THAT UNDERLAY
ALL OF THEIR OBSERVATIONS
WERE FUNDAMENTALLY FLAWED
SO THIS LED THEM INTO STRANGE
AND UNEXPECTED DIRECTIONS.
THE ALCHEMISTS' IDEAS ABOUT
MATTER AND ITS VARIOUS FORMS
WERE DERIVED FROM
THE ANCIENT GREEKS.
IT WAS A SYSTEM OF
BEGUILING SIMPLICITY.
EVERYTHING IN THE WORLD
WAS A COMBINATION
OF JUST FOUR
IDEALIZED SUBSTANCES:
EARTH, WATER,
AIR, AND FIRE.
BUT CRUCIALLY, ALCHEMISTS WERE
ALSO SKILLED, PRACTICAL MEN.
DR. ANDREA SELLA WILL
ATTEMPT TO RECREATE A BIZARRE
EXPERIMENT PERFORMED BY
ONE OF THE LAST ALCHEMISTS,
A GERMAN NAMED
HENNIG BRAND.
BRAND WAS TRYING TO CREATE THE
LEGENDARY PHILOSOPHERS STONE,
A SUBSTANCE WITH THE POWER
TO TRANSFORM METALS.
THE IDEA OF TRANSFORMING
THEM IN SOME WAY,
ALLOWING
THEM TO GROW,
ALLOWING THEM TO MOVE
TOWARD PERFECTION
IS A REALLY FUNDAMENTAL
IDEA IN ALCHEMY.
WITH THE PHILOSOPHERS
STONE BRAND BELIEVED
HE COULD TRANSFORM
BASE METALS INTO GOLD
- THE MOST PERFECT AND
PRECIOUS METAL OF ALL.
HE BEGAN HIS
EXPERIMENT
WITH A RATHER UNLIKELY
STARTING MATERIAL:
HUMAN URINE.
ALCHEMISTS BELIEVED URINE
CONTAINED SPECIAL PROPERTIES
BECAUSE IT WAS PRODUCED
BY A LIVING BEING.
BRAND STARTED BY
REDUCING IT INTO A PASTE.
WELL, HERE IT IS.
WE'VE BEEN BOILING IT
DOWN FOR SOME TIME
AND IT REALLY
IS QUITE SMELLY.
AND YOU CAN SEE THAT IT'S
STARTING TO GET A BIT PASTY,
THERE'S ALL SORTS OF
WHITE SOLIDS IN THERE.
SO, THERE WE ARE.
I'M JUST GOING TO RUN IT
DOWN THIS GLASS ROD...
AND IT WOULD THEN HAVE BEEN
TRANSFERRED INTO A FURNACE,
THE TRIAL BY FIRE,
IF YOU WILL.
AND IT MUST HAVE BEEN
QUITE A FURNACE,
VERY HOT INDEED IN
ORDER TO DRY THIS.
IT INVOLVED GREAT
TECHNICAL SKILL,
MAKING THE FURNACE
AN APPARATUS
CONTROLLING TEMPERATURES
OVER 1,000 DEGREES CELSIUS.
AS THE EXPERIMENT
WENT ON,
WHAT BRAND SAW WAS
UTTERLY STARTLING.
HE HAD TRANSFORMED THE
URINE INTO A SUBSTANCE
THAT HAD NEVER
BEEN SEEN BEFORE.
WHEN IT COOLED THE MATERIAL
TURNED INTO A PALE, WAXY SOLID.
BUT EVEN MORE AMAZING IS
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN IT BURNS.
THERE REALLY IS POWER
IN THIS MATERIAL.
BRAND, OF COURSE, NEVER
FOUND THE PHILOSOPHERS STONE.
BUT THE SUBSTANCE HE HAD
DISCOVERED WAS NAMED
"GIVER OF LIGHT",
OR PHOSPHORUS.
IT BECAME RATHER
IMPORTANT.
IT WAS USED TO
MAKE THE MATCH.
I THINK THE ALCHEMISTS
MADE HUGE CONTRIBUTIONS
TO WHAT WE NOW
KNOW AS CHEMISTRY.
I MEAN, THEY WERE REALLY SORT
OF STRUGGLING TO UNDERSTAND
THE WORLD AND WHAT THEY DID
WAS THEY FOUND METHODS
TO ACTUALLY ISOLATE
PURE CHEMICAL MATERIAL.
THEY STARTED TO ASSEMBLE IDEAS
ABOUT HOW THE WORLD WORKED.
THE EQUIPMENT AND
PRACTICES OF THE ALCHEMISTS
LAID THE FOUNDATIONS
UPON WHICH OUR
MODERN UNDERSTANDING
OF MATTER IS BUILT.
AS EUROPE MOVED OUT
OF THE MIDDLE AGES,
NEW FORCES STARTED
TO SHAPE SCIENCE.
POWERFUL, ABSOLUTE MONARCHIES
RULED THE CONTINENT.
THEY WERE HUNGRY FOR WEAPONS
AS THEY BATTLED FOR SUPREMACY
AND THAT LED TO A STRATEGIC NEED
FOR MORE AND BETTER METALS.
THE DEMAND FOR METALS
WAS UNRELENTING.
AND DURING THE DIRTY BUSINESS
OF MINING FOR THEIR ORES,
A CHALLENGE TO
THE EXISTING IDEAS
ABOUT MATTER
STARTED TO EMERGE.
FOR OVER A THOUSAND YEARS
AIR WAS CONSIDERED TO BE
A SINGLE SUBSTANCE, BUT
THE EXPERIENCE OF MINERS
DEEP UNDERGROUND
APPEARED TO CONTRADICT THIS.
THERE WAS "BAD AIR",
WHICH KILLED MEN
AND MYSTERIOUSLY
EXTINGUISHED CANDLES...
"FIREDAM", WHICH EXPLODED
BELOW GROUND WITHOUT WARNING
AND THE WONDERFULLY
TITLED "PHLOGISTICATED AIR",
PRODUCED WHEN
THINGS BURNED.
BUT WHAT WERE
THESE AIRS,
AND HOW MANY MORE
COULD THERE POSSIBLY BE?
ACROSS EUROPE EXPERIMENTERS
SET OUT FOR ANSWERS.
IN YORKSHIRE THE CHALLENGE
TO ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
WAS TAKEN UP BY THE NATURAL
PHILOSOPHER JOSEPH PRIESTLEY.
A DEEPLY RELIGIOUS MAN, HE
STUDIED THE NATURAL WORLD
IN ORDER TO DISCOVER
MORE ABOUT GOD.
PRIESTLEY STUDIED THE
AIRS THAT WERE RELEASED
BY HEATING DIFFERENT
SUBSTANCES...
INCLUDING AN OLD ALCHEMIST
FAVORITE, MERCURIUS CALCINATUS.
MERCURY SALTS WERE VERY
COMMONLY USED IN MEDICINE
AND SO THEY WERE
VERY WIDESPREAD
AND SO STARTING
FROM MERCURIC OXIDE
WAS NOT REALLY
A GREAT SURPRISE.
FIRST HE HEATED THE POWDER
TO A HIGH TEMPERATURE.
SO AS WE HEAT HERE,
WHAT WE CAN SEE
IS THE MERCURIC
OXIDE DARKENING.
IT WAS CHANGING.
IT STARTED TO SPLIT INTO
ITS COMPONENT PARTS.
SO WE CAN START
TO SEE THE MERCURY
AS A RATHER
SILVERY MIRROR.
IT'S QUITE FAINT AT THE MOMENT
BUT THE MERCURY IS GRADUALLY
GOING TO BUILD UP AS WE
CONTINUE TO HEAT THE MATERIAL.
NEXT, USING A NEW PIECE OF
EQUIPMENT CALLED THE PNEUMATIC
TROUGH, PRIESTLEY COLLECTED
THE AIR THAT WAS GIVEN OFF.
AND THEN HE WOULD
HAVE BEEN IN A POSITION
TO ACTUALLY FIND
OUT WHAT IT DID.
HE HAD DISCOVERED AN
ENTIRELY NEW TYPE OF AIR.
HE WAS BOTH ENCHANTED
AND PERPLEXED
BY ITS FIERY
PROPERTIES.
BUT IT'S THE EVENTS THAT
FOLLOWED PRIESTLEY'S DISCOVERY
THAT WOULD REALLY MARK
IT AS A PIVOTAL MOMENT
IN OUR UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT THE WORLD IS MADE OF.
PARIS, 1774.
WHILST ON A TRIP TO BUY
MORE MERCURIC OXIDE,
PRIESTLEY WAS INVITED
TO THE HOME OF THE
GOLDEN COUPLE OF FRENCH
EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE:
MARIE-ANNE AND
ANTOINE LAVOISIER.
HISTORIAN PATRICE BRET HAS BEEN
STUDYING LAVOISIER'S ARCHIVES
AT THE ACADEMIE
DES SCIENCES IN PARIS.
AND THESE DOCUMENTS
REVEAL A VAULTING AMBITION:
TO REVOLUTIONIZE CHEMISTRY
THROUGH THE STUDY OF AIRS.
TRANSLATOR: ON THE 20TH OF
FEBRUARY, 1773 LAVOISIER WRITES:
"THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT,
IN OTHER WORDS GASES AND AIRS,
HAS COMMITTED ME TO
RESUMING ALL THE WORK
WHICH I FEEL COULD
CREATE A REVOLUTION
IN PHYSICS
AND CHEMISTRY".
THEREFORE LAVOISIER
IS CONSCIOUS THAT
THE WORK ON THE
ROLE OF GASES
WILL COMPLETELY
REVOLUTIONIZE CHEMISTRY.
SO WHEN PRIESTLEY TOLD LAVOISIER
ALL ABOUT HIS NEW FIERY AIR
HE SET OUT TO REPEAT
PRIESTLEY'S EXPERIMENT.
AND HE WAS SOON
BOASTING OF HIS DISCOVERY
- THE SAME AIR, BUT
WITH A NEW NAME.
HE CALLED IT
"OXYGEN".
IT'S THE GAS
OF LIFE.
BUT IT'S NOT THE NAMING OF
THIS GAS THAT WOULD DEFINE
LAVOISIER'S IMPORTANCE
IN THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE.
IT'S WHAT
HE DID NEXT.
HE DECIDED TO RUN THE
EXPERIMENT BACKWARDS.
THE OXYGEN AND
MERCURY RECOMBINED
TO FORM THE
MERCURIC OXIDE.
THIS MIGHT SEEM
SURPRISING IN ITSELF,
BUT THE REALLY SIGNIFICANT
THING THAT WOULD
TRANSFORM OUR UNDERSTANDING
OF MATTER IS THAT LAVOISIER
FOUND IT WEIGHED PRECISELY
THE SAME AS WHEN HE STARTED.
NOTHING WAS CREATED,
NOTHING WAS DESTROYED.
TRANSLATOR: LAVOISIER'S
IMPORTANCE IN TERMS OF
CHEMISTRY IS ESSENTIALLY
TO HAVE UNDERSTOOD
THE LAW OF CONSERVATION
OF MASS IN ALL PHENOMENA,
IN ALL CHEMICAL
REACTIONS.
THANKS TO HIM
AND HIS WORK,
THE VOCABULARY OF
CHEMISTRY BECAME ANALYTICAL.
THIS ALLOWS US
TO UNDERSTAND
CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS
IN PARTICULAR.
THE CONSERVATION OF MASS
MEANT THAT TRANSFORMATIONS
OF MATTER COULD BE ANALYZED,
DOCUMENTED, AND EXPLAINED.
IT MARKS THE BEGINNING OF
A MODERN UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE
WORLD IS MADE OF.
THE SCIENCE OF
CHEMISTRY EMERGED
THANKS TO THE
CONNECTIONS BETWEEN
THE PRACTICAL SKILLS
OF THE ALCHEMISTS,
OF THE DISCOVERY
OF NEW GASES,
AND A DEDICATION TO
PRECISE MEASUREMENT.
THIS NEW CHEMISTRY WAS
NOW POISED TO REPLACE
THE GREEK
UNDERSTANDING OF MATTER.
OUTSIDE THE LABORATORIES
OF THE RICH,
18TH CENTURY SCIENCE
WAS DEVELOPING
A TASTE FOR THE
SPECTACULAR,
POWERED BY THIS
NEW INTEREST IN GASES.
EACH YEAR THE SMALL
FRENCH TOWN OF ANNONAY
GATHERS TOGETHER TO
RECREATE THE TIME WHEN
AN ANCIENT DREAM OF TAKING TO
THE SKIES BECAME A POSSIBILITY.
LEADING THE CELEBRATIONS
ARE DESCENDANTS OF A FAMILY
OF FAMOUS PAPER MAKERS
- THE MONTGOLFIER.
THEY WERE TO LAUNCH
THE FIRST HOT AIR BALLOON.
TRANSLATOR: THEY HAD THE
IDEA OF TRAPPING HOT AIR
WITHIN A HUGE PAPER BAG
AND IT WAS THIS THAT
WENT ON TO BECOME
A HOT AIR BALLOON.
AT FIRST THEY THOUGHT IT WAS
THE SMOKE THAT MADE IT RISE
BECAUSE THE SMOKE ROSE,
BUT THEY SOON REALIZED
IT WAS THE HOT
AIR THAT DID IT.
ON THE FOURTH OF JUNE,
1783, HERE IN ANNONAY
THE FIRST BALLOON, MADE
ENTIRELY OUT OF PAPER,
SOARED OVER A MILE
INTO THE HEAVENS.
SOON BALLOON MANIA GRIPPED
FRANCE AND A PRIZE WAS OFFERED
FOR THE FIRST BALLOON TO
CARRY A MAN INTO THE SKY.
THE MONTGOLFIER SET OUT
TO BUILD A NEW BALLOON,
TWICE AS LARGE
AS THE FIRST.
THIS TIME WITH A FIRE
SUSPENDED BENEATH.
TRANSLATOR: THIS IS A
WONDERFUL BALLOON.
IT'S A REPLICA IN
TERMS OF DESIGN,
BUT IT'S POWERED
WITH PROPANE.
OF COURSE WE WEREN'T GOING
TO LUG STRAW AND WOOD
TO MAKE THIS
BALLOON FLY.
IN NOVEMBER 1783 TWO BRAVE
VOLUNTEERS TOOK TO THE AIR
AND BECAME THE FIRST
HUMANS TO LOOK DOWN
AT THE SURFACE OF
THEIR OWN PLANET.
TRANSLATOR: WELL, THEY MUST
HAVE FOUND IT EXTRAORDINARY,
MAYBE EVEN MORE EXTRAORDINARY
THAN GOING TO THE MOON.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME THAT A MAN
HAD LIFTED OFF THE GROUND.
IT WAS A HUGE ACHIEVEMENT
FOR THE MONTGOLFIER.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY FOR
THEM, IT WAS SHORT LIVED.
JUST TEN DAYS LATER, MEMBERS
OF THE ACADEMIE DES SCIENCES
IN PARIS LAUNCHED
ANOTHER BALLOON
POWERED BY A NEWLY
DISCOVERED GAS: HYDROGEN.
IT WAS 13 TIMES LIGHTER THAN
NORMAL AIR AND CONSIDERABLY
LESS DANGEROUS THAN USING
A BLAZING PILE OF STRAW.
THIS WAS SCIENCE
AS PUBLIC EVENT.
HALF OF THE CITY OF PARIS
TURNED OUT TO WATCH.
400,000 PEOPLE STARING UP INTO
THE HEAVENS IN AMAZEMENT.
BUT IT LAID DOWN A
CHALLENGE TO THE CHEMISTS:
HOW COULD THEY MAKE
ENOUGH OF THIS NEW GAS
TO COLONIZE
THE SKIES?
TO FILL THE AIR WITH
FLOATING AERONAUTS?
THE CHALLENGE
WAS PICKED UP BY
THE CHAMPION OF
THE NEW CHEMISTRY:
ANTOINE LAVOISIER.
EVER THE EXPERIMENTER,
HIS SOLUTION WAS DARING
AND IT WOULD DEAL A
BLOW TO ANOTHER OF THE
FUNDAMENTAL GREEK
SUBSTANCES...
WATER.
LAVOISIER HAD A THEORY
THAT WATER WAS ACTUALLY
MADE OF TWO GASES -
HYDROGEN AND OXYGEN.
AND USING HIS NEW
UNDERSTANDING OF MATTER
HE DEVISED AN EXPERIMENT
TO SEPARATE THE TWO.
SO HE WOULD HAVE FED WATER
IN FROM THIS SIDE AND LET IT
SORT OF DRIBBLE IN, AND THEN
HE PASSED IT DOWN AN IRON TUBE
AND THE IRON TUBE IS
HEATED TO RED HEAT
IN THIS KIND OF
BARBECUE ARRANGEMENT.
THE OXYGEN IN THE WATER
SHOULD COMBINE WITH THE IRON
IN THE TUBE CAUSING IT
TO OXIDIZE, OR RUST.
SO WE HAVE A NICE ZIGGURAT HERE
OF COALS ON TOP OF THE PIPE.
AND BY RAISING THE
TEMPERATURE WHAT WE DO IS
WE ESSENTIALLY
SPEED UP THE REACTION.
AS THE RUST FORMS,
THE OXYGEN IS SEPARATED
FROM THE WATER LEAVING
THE HYDROGEN BEHIND.
AND THOSE BUBBLES CANNOT
BE STEAM BECAUSE THE STEAM
WOULD BE CONDENSED
HERE IN THE COPPER COIL,
AND SO THAT
MUST BE HYDROGEN.
NOW FOR THE
MOMENT OF TRUTH.
ARE WE READY?
WE'RE GOING TO PUT
THE SPLINT IN THERE.
THERE'S NO QUESTION, THAT
"POP" SOUND YOU DO GET
WHEN
HYDROGEN IGNITES.
LAVOISIER
SUCCEEDED.
THEY COULD NOW MASS
PRODUCE HYDROGEN.
THE POTENTIAL OF THE
GAS BALLOON WAS INSPIRING.
NAPOLEON SAW THE
STRATEGIC ADVANTAGE
AND WAS ENCOURAGED TO
CREATE A BALLOON CORPS
CAPABLE OF INVADING
COUNTRIES FROM THE SKY.
AND THE TWO GASES
THAT MAKE UP WATER -
HYDROGEN AND OXYGEN -
WERE PART OF LAVOISIER'S
BOLD NEW VISION OF WHAT
THE WORLD IS MADE OF.
THE ELEMENTS: 33 IN ALL
- A LIST THAT INCLUDED
THE NEWLY
DISCOVERED GASES.
BUT HE DIDN'T GET
IT ENTIRELY RIGHT.
HE ALSO INCLUDED
HEAT AND LIGHT.
IT WAS A TENTATIVE NEW LIST OF
THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER.
WE HAD NOW GONE DOWN A
LAYER TO REVEAL THE ELEMENTS.
AND THIS NEW UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE WORLD IS MADE OF
WOULD IN TIME
RELEASE GREAT POWER.
THAT JOURNEY WOULD BEGIN
WITH AN ECCENTRIC ENGLISHMAN,
A BRILLIANT EXPERIMENTER
WITH A TASTE FOR
A CERTAIN MOOD-ALTERING
SUBSTANCE.
(LAUGHTER)
THE CHEMIST, HUMPHREY DAVY,
WAS THE FIRST PERSON
TO DISCOVER THE
EFFECTS OF INHALING
NITROUS OXIDE,
OR LAUGHING GAS.
HE FOUND IT WAS INTOXICATING
AND COULD INDUCE
HALLUCINATIONS AND
FEELINGS OF DREAMY EUPHORIA.
LAUGHING GAS SOON
BECAME THE VOGUE
OF 19TH CENTURY
HIGH SOCIETY,
DRAWING SIGNIFICANT
ATTENTION TO DAVY HIMSELF.
IN 1801 HE LANDED A POST AT
THE ROYAL INSTITUTION IN LONDON
WHERE HE WAS TO
CARRY OUT RESEARCH
AND GIVE PUBLIC
LECTURES.
DR. PETER WOTHERS FROM
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY
IS GOING TO RECREATE
THE EXTRAVAGANZA
THAT DAVY BROUGHT HERE
OVER 200 YEARS AGO.
CAREFULLY ADD A DROP...
DRAWN TO HIS SPECTACULAR
DEMONSTRATIONS
WAS AN
ENTHUSIASTIC CROWD.
YOUNG WOMEN WERE
ENAMORED BY
DAVY'S SHOWMANSHIP
AND CHARISMA.
AS ONE PUT IT: "HIS EYES
WERE WASTED ON EXPERIMENTS".
AND SPRINKLED
THROUGHOUT THE AUDIENCE
WAS A NEW BREED
OF ENTREPRENEUR
EAGER TO GATHER VALUABLE
CHEMICAL INFORMATION.
BUT ONE OF HIS EARLY EXPERIMENTS
HERE AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION
REALLY THRILLED
HIS AUDIENCE.
HUMPHREY DAVY ORIGINALLY
PERFORMED THIS EXPERIMENT
IN THIS VERY LECTURE THEATER
TO A CROWDED AUDIENCE
WHO HAD NEVER SEEN
ANYTHING LIKE THIS BEFORE.
DAVY WAS THE FIRST TO DISCOVER
AN ELEMENT USING THE NEW
AND LITTLE UNDERSTOOD
POWER OF ELECTRICITY.
WE'RE GOING TO ADD
A LITTLE POTASH HERE,
POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE
INTO THIS VESSEL,
AND WE NEED TO MELT
THIS BECAUSE IT DOESN'T
CONDUCT ELECTRICITY
UNLESS IT'S MOLTEN.
THE FIRST TIME HE DID
THIS, DAVY HAD NO IDEA
WHAT HE WAS
ABOUT TO FIND.
THE ELECTRICITY SEEMED TO
BREAK APART THE MOLTEN POTASH
AND REVEAL ONE OF
ITS BUILDING BLOCKS -
AN ELEMENT WITH
A LILAC GLOW.
HE CALLED IT
"POTASSIUM".
THE PURPLE FLAME IS
DUE TO THE REACTION
OF POTASSIUM AS
IT'S BEING FORMED
REACTING WITH THE
OXYGEN FROM THE AIR
INSTANTLY FORMING
THE WHITE SMOKE HERE.
IT'S QUITE A
REMARKABLE ACHIEVEMENT
TO ISOLATE THIS
REACTIVE METAL.
DAVY HAD REVEALED AN ELEMENTAL
METAL THAT WAS SO VOLATILE
IT HAD NEVER EXISTED IN ITS
PURE FORM UNTIL THAT MOMENT.
DAVY REALIZED ELECTRICITY
HAD THE POWER
TO FURTHER OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF MATTER.
AND IN JUST TWO YEARS HE WENT
ON TO ISOLATE SIX NEW ELEMENTS
INCLUDING MAGNESIUM
AND CALCIUM.
BUT PERHAPS HIS
BIGGEST CONTRIBUTION
TO OUR UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT THE WORLD IS MADE OF
WAS TO DRAG CHEMISTRY
OUT OF THE LABORATORY
AND INTO THE
PUBLIC DOMAIN
PROMPTING MEMBERS OF HIS
AUDIENCE TO ASK THE QUESTIONS
WAS CHEMISTRY
USEFUL?
WAS THERE
MONEY IN IT?
CHEMISTRY WAS POISED TO
BECOME A POWER IN THE WORLD.
BUT THE JOURNEY IT
TOOK TO GET THERE
WAS WONDERFULLY
UNPREDICTABLE.
IT STARTS IN THE TROPICS WITH
A PROBLEM THAT PREOCCUPIED
THE EMPIRE BUILDERS
OF THE 19TH CENTURY:
MALARIA.
THE DISEASE CARRIED BY THIS
TINY INSECT WAS ONE OF THE
GREATEST THREATS TO
IMPERIAL COLONIZATION.
MALARIA WAS A HUGE PROBLEM
FOR THE NEW COLONIES,
IN PARTICULAR
INDIA
WHERE THEY LOST UP TO
TWO MILLION PEOPLE A YEAR.
AND ARMY RECORDS SHOW
THAT MILLIONS OF COLONIALS
AND ARMY MEMBERS
WERE ACTUALLY KILLED.
JAMAICA - A FORMER BRITISH
COLONY - IS ONE OF THE PLACES
WHERE THEY
DEVELOPED A SOLUTION.
AND IT CAN BE FOUND HERE
IN THE BLUE MOUNTAINS
AT THE CINCHONA
BOTANICAL GARDENS.
THIS IS THE CINCHONA TREE, ONE
OF THE LAST ONES IN JAMAICA.
AND YOU HAVE TO IMAGINE THAT
THERE WERE PLANTATIONS
ALL AROUND THE GARDENS
HERE ON THE HILLSIDES
- HUNDREDS OF
ACRES OF THIS TREE.
NOW CAN YOU GIVE
ME A LITTLE BARK?
THE KEY TO ITS ROLE IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST MALARIA
IS TO BE FOUND LOCKED
AWAY IN ITS BARK.
IT TASTES AWFUL...
MY GOD, IT
TASTES AWFUL.
BUT THIS IS ACTUALLY
CONTAINING QUININE
AND THIS IS WHAT CURED THE
FEVER WHICH WAS MALARIA.
QUININE, CONTAINED WITHIN THE
BARK OF THE CINCHONA TREE,
WAS THE BEST DEFENSE AGAINST
THIS HORRENDOUS DISEASE.
THERE WAS AN INSATIABLE
DEMAND FOR THE STUFF.
THE BRITISH NEEDED 750
TONS A YEAR FOR INDIA ALONE.
SO CINCHONA PLANTATIONS
WERE ESTABLISHED IN ALL
PARTS OF THE WORLD THAT
COULD GROW THE TREE.
BUT THE MIRACLE
CURE FOR MALARIA
HAD A SIGNIFICANT
DRAWBACK.
THIS IS A 20 YEAR
OLD TREE...
IN OTHER WORDS IT
GROWS EXTREMELY SLOWLY
AND IT WAS EXTREMELY
DIFFICULT TO PRODUCE ENOUGH
QUANTITIES OF QUININE FOR
THE ENTIRE WORLDWIDE MARKET.
FACED WITH THIS PROBLEM,
GOVERNMENTS LOOKED
TO CHEMISTS TO COME UP
WITH A MANMADE ALTERNATIVE.
THE CHALLENGE TO
MAKE ARTIFICIAL QUININE
WAS TAKEN UP IN A MAKESHIFT
LAB IN LONDON'S EAST END
BY THE YOUNG
WILLIAM PERKIN.
HE BEGAN HIS SEARCH FOR QUININE
BY EXPERIMENTING WITH COAL TAR
- A BYPRODUCT OF MAKING GAS
FOR THOUSANDS OF GAS LIGHTS
THAT LIT THE TOWNS AND
CITIES OF VICTORIAN BRITAIN.
IT WAS NASTY STUFF.
A TOXIC COCKTAIL OF
CARCINOGENIC CHEMICALS.
TOM WELLS IS GOING TO
REPEAT PERKIN'S EXPERIMENT
USING SUBSTITUTES.
COAL TAR WAS VERY CHEAP AT
THE TIME, PLENTY OF IT AROUND
AND ONE OF THE THINGS YOU
COULD GET FROM COAL TAR
WAS ANILINE.
ANILINE WAS KEY FOR PERKIN
BECAUSE HE KNEW IT HAD
ROUGHLY THE SAME CHEMICAL
COMPOSITION AS QUININE.
SO TO THAT HE ADDED
A BIT OF SULFURIC ACID
THAT WE USE IN CAR
BATTERIES TODAY,
AND THEN ADDED THE
MAGIC INGREDIENT,
THE POTASSIUM
DICHROMATE,
WHICH IS ESSENTIALLY
A CHEMICAL BLEND
THAT MAKES IT ALL
REACT TOGETHER.
AND PERKIN WAS JUST
HOPING THAT IT WOULD
REACT IN THE RIGHT WAY
AND MAKE QUININE.
SO ONCE HE'D MIXED
THESE ALL TOGETHER,
ESSENTIALLY HE GOT
HORRIBLE BLACK GUNK
WHICH BY ANY STRETCH
OF THE IMAGINATION
IS A BIT OF
A FAILURE.
IF I'D GOT THIS I'D HAVE
JUST THROWN IT IN THE BIN.
BUT PERKIN, HE WAS A
CONSIDERABLY BETTER
SCIENTIST THAN ME AND HE SAW
SOMETHING OF INTEREST IN THERE.
WHAT PERKIN HAD NOTICED
WAS A FAINT BUT INTERESTING
BASE COLOR TO
THE BLACK GUNK.
IT CERTAINLY
WASN'T QUININE
BUT HE DECIDED
TO FILTER IT OUT.
I HAVE TRIED THIS IN MY LAB
AND THIS IS WHAT I GOT -
THIS TINY AMOUNT
OF SOLID HERE.
SO WHAT PERKIN DID NEXT
WAS HE TOOK THIS SOLID
AND HE DISSOLVED IT
UP IN SOME METHANOL
JUST TO SEE WHAT
WOULD HAPPEN.
AND THEN WHEN HE WHIPPED
OUT HIS SILK HANDKERCHIEF,
DIPPED IT IN...
PERKIN HAD ACCIDENTALLY
DISCOVERED THE COLOR MAUVE.
IT WAS THE FIRST
EVER SYNTHETIC DYE.
HE MAY NOT HAVE
MADE QUININE,
BUT HE DID CREATE
A FASHION SENSATION.
THIS DRESS IS AN ORIGINAL,
DYED IN THE 1860'S.
THE RICH AND FAMOUS WANTED TO
BE SEEN WEARING PERKIN'S MAUVE.
BY THE 1870'S HIS
FACTORY WAS MAKING
HUNDREDS OF TONS
OF DYE A YEAR
ADDING PERKIN'S GREEN
AND BRITANNIA VIOLET
TO HIS GROWING
CATALOG OF VIVID COLORS.
PERKIN IS RIGHTLY
CELEBRATED AS
THE FATHER OF
INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY.
BUT THE LEAD SOON
PASSED TO GERMANY
WHERE INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTS
WORKED OUT HOW TO
MAKE AMMONIA WHICH LED
TO ARTIFICIAL FERTILIZERS
THAT TODAY SUSTAIN
THE GLOBAL POPULATION.
BUT THE JOURNEY THAT
BEGAN IN THE TROPICS
WITH THE SEARCH FOR
QUININE ALSO LED HERE...
TO THE KILLING FIELDS
OF THE GREAT WAR.
THE SOLDIERS' UNIFORMS
WERE COLORED KHAKI
WITH ARTIFICIAL
DYES.
EXPLOSIVES WERE PRODUCED
BY THE SAME PROCESS
USED TO MAKE
FERTILIZERS.
IT BROUGHT US THE HORRORS
OF POISONED GAS - CHLORINE
A GAS WHICH WAS USED
IN THE DYE INDUSTRY
THAT PERKIN
HAD PIONEERED.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR HAS
BEEN DESCRIBED BY SOME
AS THE
CHEMIST'S WAR.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY BECAME
A FORCE IN WORLD HISTORY
THANKS TO THE
CONNECTIONS BETWEEN
THE DISCOVERY
OF ELEMENTS,
THE GROWTH OF
EUROPEAN EMPIRES,
AND THE FIRST
SYNTHETIC DYE - MAUVE.
BUT THE SEARCH FOR WHAT
THE WORLD IS MADE OF
WAS FAR
FROM OVER.
IN UNIVERSITIES
ACROSS THE WORLD,
RESEARCHERS WERE
TRYING TO MAKE SENSE OF
WHAT THOSE ELEMENTS MIGHT
THEMSELVES BE MADE OF.
THE MAIN THEORY WAS THAT
EVERY ELEMENT WAS MADE OF
TINY INDIVISIBLE CHUNKS
OF MATTER CALLED "ATOMS"
IMAGINED AS BEING
POLISHED BILLIARD BALLS
AND THESE ATOMS OF DIFFERENT
ELEMENTS JOINED TOGETHER
TO MAKE UP EVERYTHING
YOU CAN SEE OR TOUCH.
THERE WAS JUST ONE TRICKY
PROBLEM WITH THIS THEORY:
PROOF.
THEY WERE FAR TOO
SMALL FOR ANYONE TO SEE.
ONE OF THE FIRST CLUES TO THIS
THEORETICAL WORLD OF THE ATOM
WOULD COME FROM A
GLORIOUSLY UNEXPECTED SOURCE.
FROM THE WORLD OF
THE SUPERNATURAL.
TO THE
MODERN MIND
WILLIAM CROOKES IS A
PUZZLING KIND OF SCIENTIST.
HIS INTERESTS RANGE FROM
DISCOVERING NEW ELEMENTS
TO INVESTIGATING THE
WORLD OF SEANCES
AND SPIRITUAL
APPARITIONS.
AT THE TIME THERE WERE
REPORTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS
CLAIMING TO SHOW EVIDENCE
OF LEVITATION, ECTOPLASM,
AND COMMUNICATION
WITH SPIRITS.
CROOKES SET ABOUT A SCIENTIFIC
INVESTIGATION OF THEIR CLAIMS.
CROOKES SPENT SOME OF
HIS TIME LOOKING AT SEANCES,
INVESTIGATING MEDIUMS, AND
WHEN HE WASN'T DOING THAT
HE WAS HERE INSIDE THE
LABORATORY INVESTIGATING
ELECTRICAL PHENOMENA
WITH DEVICES LIKE THIS
WHICH IS NOW CALLED
A CROOKES TUBE.
THERE'S AN EVACUATED GLASS
TUBE WHICH HAS GOT SOME AIR IN,
IT'S NOT COMPLETELY
EVACUATED...
BUT THERE IS GASES OF
LOW PRESSURE INSIDE HERE
AND THERE'S TWO ELECTRODES
- THERE'S A CATHODE,
WHAT WE CALL THE
NEGATIVE ELECTRODE,
AND THERE'S THE ANODE,
THE POSITIVE ELECTRODE.
HE PASSED A HIGH VOLTAGE
ACROSS THE ELECTRODES
AND THE RESULT
WAS STRIKING.
WAS THIS A
SPIRITUAL EMANATION?
WELL, CROOKES WAS A
CAREFUL EXPERIMENTER.
HE FOUND THAT THE BEAM
COULD BE BENT WITH A MAGNET,
SUGGESTING IT WAS IN SOME
WAY ELECTRICAL IN NATURE.
THAT IS PRETTY
CLEAR EVIDENCE THAT
WHATEVER IT IS INSIDE THERE
IS ELECTRICALLY CHARGED.
TO FIND OUT MORE, CROOKES
CAME UP WITH AN INGENIOUS PLAN.
HE SET ABOUT MAKING A NEW TUBE
WITH AN ADDITIONAL MODIFICATION
- A TINY
PADDLEWHEEL.
SO I'M GOING TO SWITCH ON
AND LET'S SEE IF IT WORKS.
THE FACT THAT THE PADDLEWHEEL
TURNED PROVED TO CROOKS THAT
THERE MUST BE SOME SORT OF
PARTICLES IN THE TUBE THAT WERE
BOMBARDING THOSE LITTLE VEINS
AND MAKING THE WHEEL TURN.
THE CONCLUSION HE REACHED IN
THE END WAS THAT WAS EVIDENCE
THAT THERE'S SOME
FOURTH FORM OF MATTER.
WE ALREADY KNOW
ABOUT THREE
- THERE'S GASES,
SOLIDS, AND LIQUIDS -
AND CROOKES SAID PERHAPS
THERE'S A FOURTH STATE,
WHAT HE CALLED "RADIANT
MATTER" AND HE TRIED TO
BUILD UP A THEORY BASED ON
THIS SPECIAL RADIANT MATTER
THAT WOULD EXPLAIN WHAT
WAS HAPPENING INSIDE THE TUBE.
TRY AS HE MIGHT,
CROOKES COULDN'T FIND
SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE
TO PROVE HIS THEORY.
BUT HIS WORK DID GO ON
TO INSPIRE ONE PHYSICIST
IN PARTICULAR: JOSEPH
JOHN THOMPSON, OR J.J.
HE BUILT MORE ACCURATE
AND SOPHISTICATED
VERSIONS OF THE
CROOKES TUBE
AND WITH THESE MANAGED TO
CALCULATE THAT THE PARTICLES
CAUSING THE WHEEL TO
TURN WERE ASTONISHINGLY
OVER A THOUSAND TIMES
SMALLER THAN AN ATOM.
THEY WERE NAMED
"ELECTRONS"
- THE FIRST SUBATOMIC
PARTICLES TO BE DISCOVERED.
IT WAS AN ACHIEVEMENT
THAT GAINED J. J. THOMPSON
THE NOBEL PRIZE
FOR PHYSICS IN 1906.
A NEW LAYER OF
OUR UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE
WORLD IS MADE OF
OPENED UP IN THE
EARLY 20TH CENTURY.
THE WORLD WAS
MADE OF ATOMS AND
THEY WERE MADE UP OF THREE
FUNDAMENTAL PARTICLES:
ELECTRONS ORBITING A NUCLEUS
OF PROTONS AND NEUTRONS.
A SUITABLY GRAND LOCATION
TO GIVE YOU A SENSE OF
THE WORLD INSIDE AN ATOM IS
ST. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL IN LONDON.
IT'S THE PERFECT PLACE
TO APPRECIATE ITS SCALE
AND PROPORTIONS.
THE NUCLEUS AT THE HEART OF
THE ATOM AND WHERE NEARLY
ALL THE MASS RESIDES
WOULD ACTUALLY BE
SMALLER THAN A
SINGLE GRAIN OF SAND.
THE REST IS
EFFECTIVELY A VOID.
EVERYTHING WE
THINK OF AS SOLID,
ALMOST ALL OF IT
IS EMPTY SPACE.
THE OTHER STRANGE THING
ABOUT THE INSIDE OF AN ATOM
IS THAT TRADITIONAL LAWS
OF PHYSICS DON'T APPLY.
EARLY ATOMIC THEORY ENVISAGED
THE ATOM AS A MINI SOLAR SYSTEM
WITH THE NUCLEUS
AS THE SUN
AND THE ELECTRONS THE
PLANETS ORBITING AROUND IT.
BUT IT SOON BECAME
CLEAR THAT ELECTRONS
BEHAVED NOTHING
LIKE PLANETS.
THEY ARE NEVER
JUST IN ONE PLACE.
THEY FLIT AROUND
IN MANY PLACES.
BY THE ALTAR...
UP THERE IN
THE DOME...
ALL AT THE
SAME TIME.
A NEW THEORY WAS
REQUIRED TO EXPLAIN
THE STRANGE WORLD
INSIDE THE ATOM.
THE BEHAVIOR OF
ELECTRONS CAN BE DESCRIBED
NOT AS CERTAINTIES
BUT AS PROBABILITIES.
NOT WHERE
ELECTRONS WILL BE,
BUT WHERE THEY
ARE LIKELY TO BE.
THE NEW THEORY WAS
KNOWN AS "QUANTUM".
NIELS BOHR, THE FATHER
OF QUANTUM PHYSICS,
ONCE SAID "THOSE WHO
ARE NOT SHOCKED BY IT
CANNOT POSSIBLY
HAVE UNDERSTOOD IT".
EVEN ALBERT
EINSTEIN SAID THAT
"GOD DOES NOT PLAY
DICE WITH THE UNIVERSE".
BUT QUANTUM THEORY
IS NONETHELESS
THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN
TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY.
1945, AND A WARTIME
GENERATION CELEBRATED VICTORY
AND THE POSSIBILITY
OF PEACE AND PLENTY.
THEY DREAMED OF HOW TECHNOLOGY
COULD MAKE THEIR LIVES BETTER
AND BEHIND MANY OF THESE DREAMS
WAS THE SCIENCE OF THE ELECTRON.
IT WAS A BRAND NEW WORLD,
AND WHAT MADE IT POSSIBLE
WERE THESE: VALVES.
A DISTANT RELATION
OF THE CROOKES TUBE,
THEY WERE ESSENTIALLY A WAY
OF CONTROLLING ELECTRONS.
THEY WERE THE WORKHORSE
OF THE ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY.
THEY WERE USED TO AMPLIFY
ELECTRICAL SIGNALS IN RADIOS
AND TELEPHONE
EXCHANGES...
AND TO SWITCH BINARY SIGNALS
IN THE EARLY COMPUTERS.
THEY WERE MANUFACTURED
BY THE MILLIONS.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY THEY
HAD SEVERAL DRAWBACKS.
THEY WERE BIG, REQUIRED A
LOT OF POWER, GOT REALLY HOT,
AND WERE INCREDIBLY
BREAKABLE.
BUT THE STRANGE WORLD
OF QUANTUM THEORY
WAS TO PROVIDE
A REPLACEMENT.
IT WAS IN THE LAB OF
A TELEPHONE COMPANY
THAT QUANTUM
THEORY CAME OF AGE.
BELL LABS WANTED A
BETTER, CHEAPER WAY
OF CONNECTING
AMERICANS.
AND TO DO THAT THEY NEEDED
TO REPLACE THE VALVE.
THEIR RESEARCH TEAM WAS
LED BY WILLIAM SHOCKLEY,
A SLICK, CLEVER, AND
RATHER DIFFICULT INDIVIDUAL,
BUT THEY CAME UP WITH
A QUANTUM SOLUTION:
THE WORLD'S
FIRST TRANSISTOR.
IT LOOKS SIMPLE, BUT
YOU CAN'T MAKE THIS DEVICE
JUST BY KNOWING
THAT ELECTRONS EXIST.
YOU NEED TO KNOW
HOW THEY BEHAVE.
QUANTUM THEORY ENABLED
SHOCKLEY'S TEAM TO PREDICT
HOW ELECTRONS WOULD
BEHAVE IN DIFFERENT MATERIALS.
WHICH MEANT THEY COULD
ENGINEER A SOLID STATE DEVICE
THAT COULD AMPLIFY AND
SWITCH ELECTRONIC SIGNALS
JUST LIKE A VALVE.
TRANSISTORS WERE SMALL, ROBUST,
AND REQUIRED VERY LITTLE POWER.
THEY UTTERLY
TRANSFORMED OUR WORLD.
AND IN JUST 60 YEARS
WE HAVE COME TO THESE:
MICROPROCESSORS THAT CONTAIN
BILLIONS OF TRANSISTORS.
THEY ARE THE
ULTIMATE EXPRESSION
OF THE GREAT POWER
THAT CAN BE UNLEASHED
FROM AN UNDERSTANDING
OF THE MATERIAL WORLD.
DELVING EVER
DEEPER INTO MATTER
HAS UNDOUBTEDLY
CHANGED OUR SOCIETY.
THE BUILDINGS WE LIVE
IN, THE WAY WE TRAVEL,
HOW WE
COMMUNICATE -
IN SHORT, OUR WAY OF LIFE
IS LARGELY A PRODUCT OF
OUR ATTEMPTS TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE WORLD IS MADE OF.
BUT THIS JOURNEY
IS FAR FROM OVER.
THERE WILL BE NEW
LAYERS TO DISCOVER,
EVER MORE
STRANGE.
IT COULD BE WHAT
SEEMS ODD NOW
IS SIMPLY WHAT WE DO
NOT YET UNDERSTAND.